okay good morning everyone thank you for
uh adapting to the change in today's
schedule uh I'm still sick so we are
going to do this as a recorded lecture
today rather than uh live so just as a
reminder for uh where we are and where
we're going um we're working our way
through the tools of the trade for
evolutionary robotics what are the basic
tools you need to be able to evolve
virtual robots uh in a physics engine we
almost finished our discussion last time
about building brain for our robots
which are artificial neural networks
we'll finish that lecture uh shortly and
then we will move on to lecture five
evolutionary algorithms how do we
actually go about evolving the brains of
our robots in Virtual
Worlds just as a reminder uh undergrads
you're working on uh assignment three uh
where you're implementing joints that
connect links together and grad students
you're working on assignments five and
six uh I misspoke uh last time you're
implem ing uh you're implementing Motors
and then you're doing in assignment five
and then in assignment six you're doing
a little bit of refactoring of your code
to clean it up and modularize it uh in
preparation for the remaining
assignments okay I normally ask if
there's any questions but none of you
can respond so let's just push right on
uh just to remind you we were talking
about neural networks last time very
generally speaking neural networks are
made up of simulated neurons represented
as these circles and synapses
represented by these arrows which are
connections between
neurons we talked uh last time about
hidden neurons which added between input
neurons and output neurons can allow
more complicated Transformations from
the values arriving at the inputs to the
outputs and we ended last time by
looking at one of the problems that
neural networks can face which is known
as overfitting they can end up
memorizing patterns uh
and then they fail to be able to
generalize to new examples I showed you
this patient and emergency room example
last time this is important for robotics
as well you can imagine that if you
evolve an artificial neural network uh
for your robot that allows it to run
around in one environment after
Evolution if you take that evolved robot
with an evolved neural network and place
that robot in a new environment it fails
to behave properly because the neural
network because the robot has in a way
memorized the kinds of sensor motor
patterns that it experienced in the
environment during
Evolution this is just to remind us that
one of the still outstanding problems in
Ai and Robotics in general is what
happens when we train or evolve our
robots or AI in safe environments and
deploy them out in the world how can we
guarantee or at least reduce the
likelihood that they will misbehave in
new environments this is one of the
issues that we need to look out for okay
so uh we talked so we actually ended
last time talking about uh recurrent
connections or recurrent synapses all of
the synapses you've seen so far Point uh
away from the sensor or input layer
towards the motor or output layer we can
also have recurrent connections that
connect together hidden ner neurons
connect together hidden neurons or
connect together motor neurons and when
we're updating the values of the neurons
in a neural network that contains
recurrent connections we do so as
follows let's assume at this particular
point in time these two sensor uh
neurons have these two values we need to
update the value of or need to compute
the value of this motor neuron we take
this value times this value the weight
of this synapse we take this value and
multiply it by the weight of this
synapse we now need to get a value from
this neuron and multiply it by the
weight of the synapse but we haven't
updated or we haven't computed the value
of this neuron yet so what do we do we
reach backward in time to time step T
and we get the previous value of that
neuron so it's the current value of this
sensor times its synapse the current
value of this sensor times its synapse
plus the past value of this neuron times
its synaptic weight sum those three
values and that's the value of motor one
if you think about it what the this
motor neuron or what the robot so to
speak is doing at this point in time is
combining what it currently is
experiencing with what it remembers from
the past so recurrent connections add me
memory to a neural network this can be
very important when we're using a neural
network to control a robot because what
a robot should do in a in a given
situation may depend on what it's
experienced in its recent
past a robot with a neural network
controller that does not contain
recurrent connections or recurrent
synapses cannot remember anything that
happened in the past and is doomed to
always do exactly the same thing when it
experiences exactly the same sensory
input okay all right there's a problem
with recurrent connections though or
there's a challenge to it um let's
imagine this particular neural network
here's some synaptic weights here we've
got two recurrent connections one
connecting uh this output node this
output neuron to this output neuron and
a second recurrent connection that
connects this output neuron to this out
output neuron assume that we know what
we want our output neurons to do
whenever they receive a particular pair
of
inputs as we saw before when we talked
about the back propagation of error
algorithm we see what the actual values
are that arrive at the output neurons We
compare those outputed values to what
the values should have
been and we look to see whether there's
any error in this case output neuron one
did what it was supposed to do but
output neuron 2 did not do what it was
supposed to do so there is nonzero error
at this neuron the back propagation of
error algorithm tells us that we should
then take that nonzero error and start
propagating backwards along all of the
synapses that arrive at the erroneous
neuron let's start doing that if we do
we walk backwards uh we walk backwards
along this synapse we change its weight
we walk backwards along this synapse to
change its weight and we walk backwards
along this synapse to change its weight
the back propagation of error algorithm
says we don't stop until we get to the
input layer so let's keep going if we
went along this if we go along if we
back propagated along this synapse we're
done we've reached the input layer if we
back propagate along this synapse we
reach the input layer and we're done
when we back propagated along this
synapse we did not reach the input layer
so it might have been that this uh
synapse was contributing to the error of
this neuron but maybe this synapse was
actually correct and it was these neur
these
synapses sorry it was these synapses
that were contributing air here which
propagated along to here so we have to
keep going we have to keep back
propagating but if we do you're going to
back propagate along here along here
change this synapse and back propagate
along here which means we're back to
here and it's a mess We've Ended up
haven't we can't really localize where
the error originated at this neuron
we've had to go back along every single
synapse looking for errors and trying to
change every thing whenever we're trying
to do this Global change or make a
change to all the synaptic weights
there's a good chance that we actually
might be able to reduce the air here but
because we're making so many changes we
might actually break something that's
already working which is this neuron so
there's a good chance that we might
increase the air for another input
pattern or at a different neuron in
essence when we apply the back
propagation of air algorithm to a neural
network with recurrent connections it's
like using a sledgehammer on the neural
network we're making we we're forced to
make huge changes the reason we're
talking about this again is that there
are uh challenges with the back
propagation of aor algorithm that we're
going to sidestep in this in this course
by not using the back propagation of
error algorithm uh we are simply going
to evolve synaptic weights and that may
have a dilus effect on a robot's
Behavior or it might improve that
robot's Behavior slightly we're just
going to let Evolution figure out where
the error was and fix
it okay a little bit more terminology
just so you can connect what you're
learning in this course to what you
might learn about machine learning in
other classes what we the example we
just saw is known as supervised learning
in the sense that for every possible
pattern of inputs
that can arrive at the neural network we
know exactly what the output of every
neuron should be so we can supervise the
training or the reduction of air this is
the supervisory signal it tells us
exactly what we should have got and the
we can then localize errors at least at
the output layer we know whether where
the output layer made a mistake and we
can take that supervisory signal and
with the back propagation of eror
algorithm we can work backwards to try
and fix that error so supervised
learning is in many ways a simpler uh
task than what we're going to look at in
this class which is semi-supervised
learning we're mixing the term evolution
and learning uh Evolution and learning
in nature are very different things
unfortunately in Ai and machine learning
and Robotics sometimes these terms learn
learning and evolution are mixed up a
little
bit from now on we're going to just talk
about evolution in this class or
evolutionary algorithms or evolving
robots or evolving artificial neural
networks but you can uh you these
evolutionary algorithms are often seen
by the machine Learning Community as
semisupervised learning algorithms why
is that in the case of a robot for any
given pattern that falls on its sensors
we don't know what its Motors should do
that's what we want the evolutionary
algorithm to figure out for
us we simulate our robot in a physics
engine uh at time step uh zero it gets
this sensory pattern the motors do
something at the next time step for
example maybe the robot experienes this
sensor pattern the robot does this and
keeps going and keeps going at the end
of the simulation we get back just one
Global number which represents the
overall behavior of the robot it
represents the overall quality of the
neural network that's controlling that
robot um for a lot of the experiments
we're going to see in this course that
overall number represents the distance
the robot traveled we're going to evolve
the robot to move if we evolve the robot
to grasp an object this number might
represent the distance between the
robot's fingertips and the object
doesn't really matter what matters for
our purposes is that we don't get back a
detailed signal of many numbers which
allow us to uh localize exactly where
the problem is we get back a
semi-supervised signal we get a a global
picture of how well or how poorly the
neural network caused the robot to move
the task is then to obviously figure out
how to alter that neural network so the
next time we drop that altered neural
network into the robot this number
increases gets better we don't know
exactly where in the neural network to
make changes to make that happen so
we're in a semi-supervised learning
situation okay again that's just to
connect this back to some things you
might hear in other
classes okay that completes our lecture
on artificial neural networks obviously
you can't ask me any questions today but
when we meet again in person on Tuesday
if you have any questions about this
please raise them in class let's move on
now to our discussion of the second tool
of the trade for this class which is
evolutionary
algorithms obviously there are now
multiple courses uh at UVM that you can
take that are exactly about uh machine
learning and neural networks there is a
also a sister course to this class which
is called evolutionary computation which
goes into great depth about evolutionary
algorithms uh in this course we're going
to spend just one class this class
talking about them so apologies in
advance we're going
to apologies in advance we're going to
skim over a lot of the interesting
details about evolutionary
algorithms okay let's start at the
beginning um evolutionary algorithms
have been around for a long time um
arguably the very first computer program
that was written back in the 1950s was
something very much like and
evolutionary algorithm so they have a
very long and proud history in computer
science the basic idea um is as the name
implies evolutionary algorithms they
take inspiration from biology and they
take inspiration specifically from
darwinian uh Evolution so as a computer
scientist if you look at what happens in
nature you you can start to
recognize that darwinian Evolution looks
a lot like an
algorithm we start with a population uh
of organisms and those organisms look
and act differently that's the phenotype
of an organism we'll come back to
phenotype in a moment and some of the
reasons for why they look and act
differently can be traced back to their
genes so not only do these individuals
have phenotypic variation they look and
act differently um they also have
genetic uh variation their genes are
slightly different from one organism to
another inside a
species unfortunately uh how you look an
act influences whether or not you're
able to reproduce and be survived by
your Offspring those that do not uh
produce Offspring uh or die off early um
they die off early those that survive
produce uh copies of
themselves when they produce copies of
themselves there are slight changes that
occur in the in the genetics during that
uh copying and reproduction process so
we have the more fit organisms the one
that survived survive and reproduce less
fit organisms die and as we've all
learned uh as we've all learned this
leads over time to a population uh a
population of organisms that are more
and more fit to their
environment that's biological evolution
we can take this idea idea and distill
it down into a computer program so we're
going to replace our organisms in this
simple example with vectors of
numbers where these vectors of numbers
represent a solution to some problem we
haven't defined that problem yet but we
have instead of a population of
organisms we have a population of
candidate Solutions these are random
guesses at the beginning to what the the
these Solutions
are we then take each solution in turn
and apply it to the problem and we get
back a single number as we just talked
about uh a few slides back we get back a
single number which tells us how well or
how poorly that solution solves the
given
problem solutions that obtain a a lower
score than other Solutions in the
population are deleted
and the surviving
Solutions are a uh produce offsprings of
themselves we take this particular
solution and we make a copy of it we
take this solution we make a copy of it
when we're copying one solution to
create a new solution to fill the Gap
left by those that have died off every
once in a while we introduce a random
mutation we alter one or a few of the
values in the surviving Vector that's
being
copied sometimes in an evolutionary
algorithm or a genetic algorithm uh we
sometimes introduce not just mutation
but recombination as well we might
choose at random two of the surviving
Solutions and take genetic part of the
genetic material from one parent and
take part of the genetic material from a
second parent and glue those two pieces
together to make a new solution to the
problem that combines parts of two
different surviving Solutions sexual
recombination okay that's the basic idea
of an evolutionary
algorithm evolutionary robotics is when
the problem is we want a machine that
does something that puts away our dishes
or shovels our snow or cleans our floors
and a candidate solution to that problem
is a machine that actually does that we
can imagine if the problem is please
clean my floors you can imagine an
infinite number of robots that do a
better or worse job at cleaning your
floors and theoretically we could we
could use an evolutionary algorithm or a
genetic algorithm to search over the
space of all possible robots looking for
the robot that does the best job of
cleaning uh your floors so uh now we're
not looking at we're not looking at
birds or vectors we're looking at
robots here's uh here's a uh here's a
evolved robot this robot was evolved to
solve a particular problem which is to
move along uh to move along a horizontal
beam as you see here this robot has
evolved the ability to do so I am sure
in the space of all possible robots
there is a robot that moves faster and
more energy efficiently along this beam
but for our purposes uh this is one of
the better robots that we found uh this
is a screenshot from now a very old
experiment that I was involved in as we
talked about uh as we've talked about a
few times already we are doing this in
simulation we're evolving populations of
robots throw away the bad robots and
making randomly modified copies of the
better robots and repeating this process
and repeating this process over and over
again in this old experiment this was
the best we came up with and what's not
visualized in this uh flowchart here is
a final step where if we get a robot
that's sufficiently interesting or
potentially useful we go to the effort
of then taking that evolved robot from
simulation and building a physical copy
of it
uh in this particular experiment we we
actually went that extra mile and built
this robot and you'll notice I'm not
sure if I can play both of these at the
same time yep okay you'll notice that
there are some similarities and
differences between the ways they move
but pretty close pretty close um the
other reason why I wanted to show you
this particular pair of images is to
remind you of our discussion about
embodied cognition last week one of the
uh advantages of having a body as an
intelligent machine is that you can
evolve or learn to exploit the physical
interaction of your body with the
environment to do whatever it is that
you need to do this is one of the more
uh graphic examples of a robot that is
exploiting its interaction between uh
its body and its environment if if we
were in person I'd ask you what that is
most of you have probably figured out
what it is you'll notice that in both
the simulated and the physical robot
it's using uh these blocks at the bottom
of its body to actually throw its weight
forward it's actually using that uh
oscillating weight and that momentum to
be able to move faster and more energy
efficiently along this beam those big
blocks uh that black block that you can
see in the physical robot that's the
battery for the robot so we had to build
this robot out of uh uh parts that were
available in 2002 unfortunately
batteries were then pretty heavy they're
still pretty
heavy this didn't end up being we
thought this was going to be a
disadvantage for the robot it was going
to have to haul this heavy weight as it
moved along the beam Evolution figured
out how to sculpt the neural network
controller of this robot we haven't
talked about its neural network
controller but this neural network has
evolved or the synaptic weights uh
inside this neural network have evolved
such that the robot moves in a
particular way in response to
Sensation that causes it to throw uh the
bottom part of its weight forward and
facilitate or ease its ability to move
okay so in a nutshell evolutionary
robotics is simply combining a genetic
algorithm or an evolutionary algorithm
with a robot simulator and then building
a physical version of it okay all right
um in order to continue our discussion
about Evolution we're going to have to
uh perform a thought experiment um this
is one of the most famous and Powerful
thought experiments in all of science um
it was formulated by a biologist Su
Wright back in the 1930s and it's known
as the fitness landscape
so what I want you to do is call up in
your mind a hypothetical landscape let's
start with a very simple one let's start
with a two-dimensional landscape let's
imagine we have a horizontal axis here
and as we move left or right along this
horizontal axis um the the height of
that landscape obviously
changes I want you to imagine uh imagine
all the way back to brenberg vehicle one
and I'm sorry I don't have the ability
to annotate on my screen here so I'm
going to draw it with my uh with my
cursor V brenberg vehicle one had a
temperature sensor on its front and a
single wheel at the back and its
temperature sensor was connected to its
motorized wheel with a single synapse so
we have a One sensor neuron one motor
neuron one synapse neural network
controller for brenberg vehicle one that
that vehicle would slow down when it was
in cold water low temperature sensation
leads to low turning of the wheel and it
would move quickly through hot water uh
high temperature readings would lead to
Rapid turning of the motorized
wheel okay you can then imagine taking
the weight or considering what should be
the weight for that single synapse so
that the robot does something that you
want it to do maybe it's stops almost
completely in cold and goes really
really fast in hot water the question
becomes what should be the value of that
single synaptic weight that's what I
want you to imagine is the horizontal
axis here it says value of Gene one so I
want you to think of that single
synaptic weight as a single Gene we're
encoding all of the synaptic weights
into a vector in this case it's a vector
of length one we have just one number
that encodes a solution to our problem
our candidate solution to our problem
which is making brenberg vehicle one do
whatever it is we want it to
do imagine that we set the synaptic
weight to this particular value whatever
this value is and we then watch brenberg
vehicle one either in simulation or
reality and imagine that Bren that
brenberg vehicle one does exactly the
opposite of whatever we want it to do it
goes very fast uh in cold water and
slows down in hot
water if our evolutionary algorithm
assigns a value to that uh to that
particular genome or genotype which is
that particular setting of values just a
single value it's going to set a very
low Fitness value the robot did that the
robot with that particular neural
network did very
poorly if we increase increase the value
of that synaptic weight a little bit the
robot does a little bit better if we uh
if we increase it again it does a little
bit better and so on so you can think
now continuing the fitness landscape
thought experiment imagine that you're
taking steps backward and forward in
this Fitness
landscape and you're experiencing
different fitnesses so in essence what
we want an evolutionary Al to do is
explore this Fitness landscape and find
as best it can high points in this
Fitness landscape to find the one two
three different possible settings for
the single synaptic weight in brenberg
vehicle one that causes it to do what we
want it to do in fact there's one
particular setting which is the best
okay let's pause for a moment and
introduce use a little bit of
terminology we're going to uh talk about
genotype and phenotype quite a bit in
this class genotype is uh is basically
the vector or the the vector or the data
structure whatever it is that contains
uh that can that encodes a candidate
solution so in our cartoon example here
the genotype has one gene in it that one
gene encodes the single synaptic weight
for brenberg vehicle uh one the
phenotype is the form and
function of the robot that results from
the genotype so the genotype in our
example here the genotype is a single
value maybe the genotype is 0.3 that's
the value of the synaptic weight we take
that 0.3 we label the single synapse in
vehicle one and then we let Vehicle One
start moving around in its
environment as it moves around in its
environment and we observe how it moves
that trajectory of its movement is the
phenotype it's the behavior of the
robot
okay okay um finally Fitness Fitness is
a measurement that we make on the
phenotype so Fitness is never computed
from the genotype Fitness is computed
from the phenotype we watch how vehicle
one moves and we assign in this simple
example a single number which is how
well vehicle one did at whatever we
wanted it to
do okay so armed with that uh
terminology oh sorry and here's a
summary of these uh a summary of these
for our purposes genotype is the storage
of the genetic information and the
phenotype is the system produced by that
information generally speaking
for this for the purposes of this course
the phenotype is the form and function
or the form and the be the shape and the
behavior of the
robot that results from that
genotype okay armed with that
terminology let's come back to the
fitness landscape for a moment if the
genotype has n genes the fitness
landscape is always going to exist in n
+ one Dimensions because the height of
the Fitness landscape as the name
implies is always Fitness yeah okay
let's imagine now uh brenberg vehicle 2
remember brenberg vehicle 2 has two
photo sensors front left and front right
and two motorized wheels back left and
back right and we have two synapses
either contralaterally connecting the
sensors to the motors or
ipsilaterally connecting the sensors to
the motors doesn't matter matter we have
two uh synapses which means if we're
going to evolve
behavior for vehicle 2 uh every time we
need to come up with two numbers the
weights of those two synapses so now uh
assuming we uh we going to evolve
vehicle 2 to exhibit some Behavior like
perhaps circle around a light source we
don't know what the two weights for
those two synapses should be so so that
the robot circles around a light source
we can imagine a fitness landscape where
we now have two horizontal dimensions
and every horizontal point in that
Fitness landscape obviously has a
two-dimensional coordinate we can take
that two-dimensional coordinate look at
those two numbers take those two numbers
apply them as synaptic weights to the
two synapses that's the genotype that
pair of numbers we then let go of the
robot we let the robot start moving
around in a simulated or physical
environment armed uh labeled with those
two synaptic weights measure how well it
does at for example circling around a
light source and assign a single number
for how well it does it's circling
around the light source and that single
number is the third coordinate it's the
value we assign to that genotype and we
get a
three-dimensional Fitness landscape in
this cartoon example you can see here uh
this particular pair of synaptic weight
values produces a robot that circles
around the light source very well this
particular pair of synaptic weights
causes the robot to do a terrible job at
circling around the light maybe it turns
around and runs away from the light
there's a whole bunch of other uh pairs
of synaptic weights that cause the robot
to do a so so job of circling around the
light okay take a moment to absorb uh
the fitness landscape metaphor we're
going to use it to explore a series of
evolutionary algorithms okay we're going
to start we're going to look now at a
series of evolutionary algorithms that
start very simple and get more and more
sophisticated they increasingly start to
resemble actual bi olical
Evolution let's start with arguably the
simplest evolutionary algorithm it's so
simple that you probably wouldn't even
consider this an evolutionary algorithm
at all bear with me I'll explain why uh
in a
moment uh this very very simple
evolutionary algorithm or maybe just a
search algorithm is called the hill
climber and here's why in the hill
climber we start the we're going to
start the hill clim Climer by creating a
random population of genotypes here's
one genotype remember it's a string of
numbers um it could be the vector could
be of length two if we're evolving pairs
of weights for vehicle two this Vector
could be of length one if we're evolving
a single synaptic weight for brenberg
vehicle one okay in the hill climber the
population size is always one meaning in
essence there is no population in the
hill climber at any given time there is
only one candidate solution to the given
problem okay let's create that single
Vector let's create that single Vector
uh with and and let's fill it with
random numbers you'll see over here
we've got our fitness landscape picture
again um I'm just drawing it in two
dimensions in this in this cartoon
example we have just one gene so let's
imagine we have just one vector we have
a population size of one for the hill
climber and the length of that Vector is
just one we have just one floating point
value so let's imagine we're trying to
find a single synaptic weight for
vehicle one we create that single
synaptic weight at random drop that into
vehicle one let vehicle one start to do
its thing this is known as the parent uh
ution represented by P here let's assume
that we randomly created a synaptic
weight that was pretty high in magnitude
it's pretty far to the right here and it
causes the braon uh vehicle one to do a
pretty poor job at whatever it is we
wanted vehicle one to do it doesn't
obtain a pretty uh it doesn't obtain a
very high height on the fitness
landscape okay what do we do at this
point um you can see that we want to go
in this direction we want to push up
here but from the point of view of the
hill climber it does not see the fitness
landscape the only thing that the hill
climber sees is the height of this
single
point I want you to imagine that uh you
want to climb Mount Mansfield but
unfortunately you choose to climb Mount
Mansfield on an incredibly foggy day you
know enough to drive to uh one of the
parking lots next to Mount Mansfield
Feld you then turn off your phone no
cheating no GPS how do you get to the
top of Mount
Mansfield first of all I don't recommend
actually trying
this it's not really clear you start in
the parking lot at a pretty low altitude
what do you do well um one thing you can
do is take a random step in a given
Direction and see whether you increase
or decrease in height that's exactly
what the hill climber does as promised
it's a a very simple algorithm but not
the smartest algorithm there is what
does that mean that means we take our
parent solution which is a vector of
length one remember in this simple
example the hill climber makes a copy of
that single length one vector and when
it makes a copy of that Vector it makes
a random alteration to the values in
that Vector there's only one value in
that Vector so it's this value that gets
Chang Changed by a slight amount in my
cartoon example here that random
mutation increases that single Gene
value or that single synaptic weight
value by a small amount which means uh
from the point of view of the hill
climber it's moved one step to the
right along this horizontal axis we take
that new synaptic weight drop it back
into vehicle one and again Watch How
vehicle one does in this cartoon T
example
here uh the child solution actually does
worse than the parents solution vehicle
one does an even worse job at whatever
we wanted it to do compared to vehicle
one when it was labeled with the
synaptic weight from the
parent let's go back to the parking lot
next to Mount Mansfield it's a foggy day
you walk out of the parking lot and you
go downhill a little bit you're probably
headed in the wrong direction what do
you do you you would probably do exactly
what the hill climber does which is
delete the
child the hill climber throws the child
away goes back to the parent makes
another copy of the parent and again
randomly mutates the parent and maybe
now this second child actually has a
lower synaptic weight than the parent we
take that lower synaptic weight run it
on vehicle one and we now realize that
vehicle one actually does a better job
at whatever we wanted it to do than
vehicle one did when it was labeled with
the parent synaptic weight in essence
the hill climber has uh figuratively
taken taken a step in the right
direction we now have a parent with
lower Fitness than the child what do you
think the hill climber does at this
point it throws away the parent keeps
the child the child becomes the new
parent so there'd be a p sitting here
and we repeat the process the parent
produces a child we evaluate the child
if the child's Fitness is lower than the
parent we throw away the
child if the child's Fitness is higher
than the parent we throw away the parent
that's it the hill climber repeats this
over and over again let's go back to the
example of you on the uh in the
foothills of Mount Mansfield you you
always retrace your step if you go
downhill but as long as you take a step
that increases your own altitude you
stay where you
are doesn't take you probably won't take
you long to realize that that's not
going to help you get you're you're
going to be very unlikely to get to the
top of Mount Mansfield you can see that
on our fitness landscape here parents
and children keep uh reproducing over
and over again to the hill climber and
the hill climber will probably gradually
climb
this hill but when it gets up here and
there's a p sitting up here p is going
to start producing children
nearby through mutation that are all
worse than P so all of those children
are going to keep getting thrown away
and P will probably continue producing
children forever and never escape this
local Hill that it's got gotten caught
on this is an important uh issue in
evolutionary algorithms in general
um what this peak is know what this
local Hill is known as is a local
Optimum meaning in a local space local
meaning in the horizontal Direction so
for synaptic weights of about this value
this is the optimal solution here's
another local Optimum within this range
of synaptic weights this is the best
synaptic weight this is the local
Optimum
if theoretically we were able to visit
every possible setting for this single
synaptic weight we would realize that
there is a global Optimum this is the
best setting for that single synaptic
weight that's possible what happens with
uh weak evolutionary algorithms like the
hill climber is that they tend to become
trapped on local
Optima so the hill climber simple to
implement is a relatively weak search
algorithm doesn't do a very good job at
search so can we complicate the hill
climber a little bit so that it is less
likely to get trapped on local
Optima what's the simplest thing we
could
do we could uh what's the simplest thing
we could do instead of you going to
Mount Mansfield on a foggy day and
hoping to find a slope that takes you
all the way to Mount Mansfield call a
bunch of your friends have them go to a
bunch of different parking lots that
surround Mount Mansfield everybody
starts taking local steps and continue
moving if they're moving uphill but
retrace their steps if they end up going
downhill and keep texting one another as
you do
this and hope that one of you manages to
to land on a slope that takes them all
the way to the top of Mount
Mansfield that's the parallel hill
climber as the name implies it's very
much like the hill climber it just runs
a bunch of hill climbers in parallel so
now when we initialize the population we
initialize the population with more than
one genome or one
genotype we've got a bunch of them which
are going to be represented as parent
one parent two and so on for each of
those parent Solutions we're going to
set the internal uh value to a random
value which means uh those initial
random parents are going to materialize
at different points along the horizontal
axis P1 lands here P2 lands here and
then both P1 and P2 run one step of the
hill climber P1 produces one child P2
produces a child and if uh if the child
is worse than the parent if a par parent
one's child is worse than it that child
is killed off and parent one is allowed
to produce another uh Offspring in this
case parent 2 produced a child that has
higher Fitness than its parent so the
parent is killed off C2 becomes the new
P2 and we then repeat one step of the
hill climber over here and another one
over here yeah so we're increasing the
odds
that someone is going to land on the
lower slopes of what turns out to be the
global
Optimum I've picked the positions of P1
and P2 on purpose here to illustrate
that this slightly more powerful
evolutionary algorithm the parallel hill
climber still can get stuck on local
Optima p uh P1 over here is going to
eventually and its offspring are
probably eventually going to climb but
then get stuck on this loal Optimum P2
and its descendants is probably going to
end up getting stuck
on uh this local Optimum so better but
not perfect can we do better let's add
in an additional detail from biological
evolution which is sexual recombination
for now we've just been considering
mutation when we take a parent and
produce a copy of that parent we
introduce a slight change a random
change to one of the values in the
child's genotype in the genetic
algorithm which is one of the oldest and
probably the most popular kind of
evolutionary algorithm we're going to
introduce sexual
recombination another note about
terminology the genetic algorithm is
such a famous algorithm that often the
name of the field as a whole which is
evolution uary algorithms is referred to
as genetic
algorithms as you've already seen and as
I'm going to try and drive home in the
rest of this lecture evolutionary
algorithms is a field of study and
within that field of study there are
dozens if not hundreds of different
kinds of evolutionary algorithms one of
which is the genetic
algorithm okay how does the genetic
algorithm work it starts out very much
like the par hill climber we start by
creating several uh random genotypes
several candidate solutions to our
problem we're going to stick with our
cartoon example of vehicle one with one
synaptic weight so again we have two
random solutions that end up at these
horizontal positions in the fitness
landscape as we just saw in the previous
example we evaluate each we evaluate P1
on vehicle one
we evaluate P2 on vehicle uh one we see
how well they do um now we take these
two
individuals and when they produce
children they do not produce a child
alone we randomly choose two uh
Solutions in the population in this
population we only have P1 and P2 so we
choose P1 and P2 we then choose a random
point along the genotype of parent
one and parent 2 and we cut the genome
uh the genotype of parent one at that
horizontal position and we cut parent
two at exactly the same horizontal
position in my cartoon example here
we've chosen this cut
Point uh after the second Gene my
apologies I'm kind of mixing metaphors
here we're dealing with a fitness
landscape over here that just has has a
s a genotype of L length one over here
in order to illustrate recombination we
have genomes that contain more than one
gene my apologies okay so we cut at
these two positions and we take all of
the genetic material uh to the left of
this cut point from parent one which is
shown in red and we copy that into child
one we then take all of the genetic
material that's to the right of the cut
point from parent 2 and copy that into
child two so we're taking some of the
genetic material from parent one we're
taking the leftand genetic material from
parent one and the rightand genetic
material from parent two copying those
two pieces and gluing them together to
make a new child in the genetic
algorithm after we've performed this
recombination event we also walk along
on this new child genome and from time
to time slightly randomly change some of
these numbers so we add mutation on top
so the genetic algorithm contains
mutation and sexual
recombination continuing my example down
here these parents might actually end up
producing a second child in which now we
take the right hand material from parent
one and we take the leftand material
from parent two and glue those together
to make a second child so that now we
have two children that are genetically
dissimilar from one another represented
by the Numbers here but still resemble
their parents in some way they they are
genetically related to their parents
what does this end up doing well as you
can see here this particular child has
more numeric differences from this
parent and from this
parent than if we just do mutation this
child is more numerically similar
similar to its parent than this child is
to its parent the fact that let's call
this C1 C1 is more genetically
dissimilar from parent one and parent
two means that child one has moved
further horizont Al in the fitness
landscape everybody see that okay so
that's a good thing we're introducing
more difference into the child compared
to the parent which means it might be
possible if the parent is trapped on the
slopes of a local Optimum for the child
to escape from that local Optimum in my
cartoon example here uh Child 2 was not
so lucky Child 2 is still pretty far
from both its parents
horizontally compared to here where we
can see that child two is not that
horizontally distant from its parent and
same thing with child one it's further
but unfortunately C2 is still trapped in
the same on the same local Optimum as at
least this
parent see one over here in our cartoon
example has been lucky it's inherited
some genc material from P1 and P2 that
has allowed it to escape from both local
Optima that its two parents are
respectively trapped on and it invades a
whole new space a whole new way of
Behaving and unbeknownst to C1 remember
this whole thing is bathed in fog the
genetic algorithm can only see the
heights of the points that it's tried so
far suddenly C1 is higher than anyone
has been before and as C1 continues to
produce Offspring in this cartoon
example one of its descendants is likely
to reach the global
Optima okay so what has happened in the
case of C1 C1 has gotten lucky that
through a series of random events we
randomly choose which pair of parents to
pair up to produce an offspring we've
randomly chosen where along the genot
types of these two parents to
cut those through those random events
we've ended up bringing together good
parts of parent one and parent two
parent one and parent two are low have a
low height meaning poor Fitness so
there's some something wrong with both
parents they're not so good at something
but whatever it is that they were bad
out that got spliced out and wasn't
brought into C1 so C1 is inheriting the
best of both parents and avoided
inheriting the worst of both parents
that is in a nutshell why sexual
recombination evolved in nature and why
it's useful for evolving robots and all
sorts of other things in machine
learning in Ai and
Robotics so the genetic algorithm it's
not perfect and it's a little more
complicated than the parallel hill
climber but it tends to a better job at
escaping local Optima um at this point
uh students usually have a number of
questions the most popular question is
how can you guarantee that the genetic
algorithm or any evolutionary algorithm
will eventually find the global Optimum
if any of you are thinking of that
question good for you it's an important
question and the answer is nobody knows
evolutionary algorithms are relatively
simple algorith orms in the space of all
machine learning algorithms but they all
share a limitation at the moment which
is we cannot guarantee that even if we
run the genetic algorithm or any other
evolutionary algorithm for a very very
long time that it will find the global
Optimum often what an evolutionary
algorithm will do will find is to find a
very very very good solution we don't
know whether it's the optimal solution I
mentioned this way back at the beginning
uh of this course biological evolution
is not an
Optimizer as many of you know the human
body is not perfect the human brain is
not perfect but it's good enough for
most of us to survive to childbearing
age uh and and protect our children
until they reach childbearing age every
organism on Earth is good enough um to
survive and some times reproduce
biological evolution is not an Optimizer
it's a
satisficer same thing goes for for
evolutionary algorithms they are not
optimizers they are
satisficers
okay okay uh let's keep going um we're
going to look at uh we're going to look
at uh the evolutionary the evolution
strategy now um this is an interesting
algorithm we're not going to use it in
this class but I think it's worth
mentioning in this case in the evolution
strategy it looks very much like uh the
genetic algorithm so I've removed a lot
of the details that they share in common
the one thing that's different about the
evolution uh strategy is the data
structure that encodes the genotype so
the genotypes in an evolution uh
strategy H uh are actually matrices
they're two uh they've got two rows in
them sorry yeah they've got two rows in
them and N columns representing the N
genes whereas in a genetic algorithm we
have just a 1 byn Vector Evolution
strategy 2 byn Matrix okay why is that
the case let's go back uh let's go back
for a moment to the fitness landscape
let's imagine uh that an evolutionary
algorithm is running and The
evolutionary algorithm has found this
particular
genotype which produced is a phenotype
that obtains this particular Fitness
it's doing
okay let's imagine that this particular
parent solution is now going to start
producing children where it either
combines its genetic material with
another parent to produce that child or
it simply produces a copy of itself and
some mutations are introduced however
the children are produced the children
more or less fall this horizontal
distance away away from the
parent um we're introducing this idea of
Step size here so the more we change the
copied genetic material of the parent
the further away horizontally the child
will fall from the parent we can
actually boil that down to a number
known as the step size which is exactly
what an evolution strategy does we'll
come back to that in a moment just think
of point one is meaning that a child any
child produced by this parent can be at
most
0.1 uh 0.1 to the right of this parent
or 0.1 to the left of this parent if you
think about the distribution of all of
those possible children you can see that
50% of them are going to be worse than
the parent and 50% are going to be
better than the parent so what that
means is it won't take long for this
parent if it's producing offspring
spring to eventually produce one that
does better than
itself let's imagine this particular
let's imagine this particular Fitness
landscape now which you can see has many
more local Optima in it than this one
does and you can see that the slopes are
steeper this is a more rough Fitness
landscape and it's much tougher to
search as you can imagine any one step
might cause you to fall off any of these
local Optima so let's
imagine let's imagine we have this
particular solution here which after a
lot of evolutionary search is actually
doing pretty well it's actually on
unbeknownst to The evolutionary
algorithm it's found a point that's on
the slope of the global Optimum Remember
The evolutionary algorithm doesn't know
this this whole mountain range is
wreathed in fog okay let's again imagine
uh let's again imagine that this
particular parent is producing children
that are at most
0.1 uh 0.1 to the right of it in terms
of Gene value and at most 0.1 to the
left of this point in gene values so
going back to vehicle one this means
that the uh synaptic weight of a child
can be at most 0.1 greater than the
synaptic weight of the
parent and a child can have a synaptic
weight that is at most 0.1 less than the
synaptic weight of this parent at in
this particular Fitness landscape a step
size of
0.1 is going to ensure that this parent
is very unlikely to ever produce a child
that's better than itself any children
that fall in this horizontal range are
are going to be worse than this
parent any children that fall within
this horizontal range are going to be
worse than the parent and it's only
within this very narrow range that
children are going to be better than
this parent this means that even we uh
even though we can't see these Peaks the
step size at this point in time should
be less than 0.1 this parent should be
producing children that are more
genetically similar to it than in this
example how do we break this Catch 22
the evolution strategy does this by
again encoding Gene values in its genome
but in the same genome every Gene value
has a corresponding step size this is
known in evolution strategies as the
strategy parameters what this means is
that if this parent represented by this
genotype here produces an
offspring we copy all the values of this
parent Vector into a child vector and as
we copy each number we're going to
mutate those numbers but we're going to
mutate them uh by a magnitude dictated
by the step size associated with the
value or with that g with that Gene so
if we copy 0.3 we might modify the value
0.3 by anywhere between 0 2 and 04 0.1
less than3 or 0.1 more
than3 when we modifi as we're copying
the parent Gene values into the child
Gene values when we hit uh this
particular Gene this one might be M this
one is going to be mutated More Than
This Gene
was this particular Gene is going to be
mutated less than these other genes so
we're allow o the evolution strategy to
set the step sizes how much we mutate
any given Gene by the last twist and the
the most the beautiful part of the
evolution
strategy is that the step sizes
themselves are
mutated so imagine multiple parents
lying somewhere in this region parents
that encode smaller step sizes are going
to produce children that are closer to
it in the fitness landscape than other
parents nearby if that have higher step
sizes those parents are going to produce
children that fall further away from it
the parent that just by chance is
producing more similar children its
descendants will start climbing this
peak better than the parent that's
producing children that are further from
it
and we're going to end up with more
genotypes in the population with smaller
step
sizes so what the evolution strategy
does is actually evolve over
evolutionary time how far or how closely
children fall to the parent and
evolution Tunes those magnitudes of
jumps by where those particular points
lie in the fitness
landscape an evolution an evolution
strategy when it's running if it's
running on a fitness landscape that's
relatively smooth those step sizes will
evolve to be bigger so that things are
jumping around more uh an evolution
strategy that's running on uh Fitness
Landscapes that are rougher like this
one here will start to evolve step sizes
that are smaller we'll see less and less
differences between children and
parents okay we've got 10 minutes left
which is great that should be just
enough to talk about the final
evolutionary algorithm I want to talk
about today that final evolutionary
algorithm is not called symbolic
regression it's called genetic
programming but before we talk about
genetic programming I want to talk about
uh the problem that genetic programming
is really good at solving the best way
to understand genetic programming is to
watch it solve a problem and that
problem is symbolic regression so let's
talk about the problem first and then
we'll talk about genetic programming
which is a solution to that
problem imagine we make a bunch of
observations we have a whole bunch of X
values which is our uh independent
variable we know what those values are
and for each value of x we then observe
the value of y which is our dependent
variable and if we plot all of that data
we can immediately see that there seems
to be some sort of pattern or
relationship between X and
Y you'll notice that the values of Y
tend to dip around a value value of x an
x value of three and they tend to
increase on either side of that value
hopefully uh that will dimly somewhere
in your dim recollection this will uh
remind you of uh High School uh High
school
algebra and you might remember what the
solution to this problem is but but bear
with me let's imagine instead of you
trying to write down a function for uh X
trying to write down uh y as a function
of X we task uh an evolutionary
algorithm with coming up with this
problem The evolutionary algorithm in
this case the uh candidate solutions to
the problem are equations here's one
candidate equation which is yal X if we
draw y = x and then we ask how well does
this equation capture the relationship
between X and Y we can see it does a
pretty poor job of capturing that
relationship if we look at how far the
observations are from the actual yal X
line we can see there's a lot of error
here
so in this
particular evolutionary algorithm that
we're going to see in a moment we're
going we're it's going to try not to
maximize Fitness but it's going to try
and minimize error this can be a little
confusing we're going to see this again
uh as we continue through this course
some of the robots we're going to evolve
are trying to minimize airor which could
be the distance of their hand from an
object or they're trying to maximize
Fitness they're trying to move as far as
they can from their starting point for
this example we're going to try and
evolve populations of
equations and better equations have
lower
air returning to our fitness landscape
for a moment when we're minimizing air
we replace Fitness on the vertical axis
with eror and now we're going to try and
search for points that move into the
deepest valley so when we're minimizing
error here's one local Optima here's one
local Optimum here's the global Optimum
other than that everything stays exactly
the same maximize Fitness or minimize
error okay all right so uh we find that
this particular equation gets high air
so it's probably deleted from the
population and replaced with something
else Let's uh hopefully you were able to
work this out in your head it's okay if
you couldn't uh here's a second equation
um and let's imagine this evolutionary
algorithm actually discovered this
equation this particular equation gets
low air or high Fitness if you want to
think about it that way and you can see
that visually the observations now are
closer on average to the uh to this
equation than this one is yeah
okay so what is the problem and what are
the candidate Solutions so the problem
that we're trying to solve in this case
is we would like to write down a
mathematical equation that describe or
the problem is we'd like to find the
relationship between X and Y a candidate
Sol any a candidate solution to that
problem is an equation here's one
candidate solution here's a second
candidate solution so in this case our
genotypes are equations remember
remember a candidate solution in is
encoded in a genotype so a candidate
solution is an equation and phenotype or
the behavior
produced The behavior produced by that
equation is this line how far is the
line described by this equation from
these
points okay just to try and ground this
so relatively abstract discussion um
here's a real world problem if you ever
spend any time in Burlington in the
summer sometimes parts of Lake Champlain
are closed to swimming because of toxic
algal blooms it turns out it's really
really hard to predict where and when a
bloom will form in the lake that being
said the Rubenstein school here at UVM
has spent many years collecting data
from the lake um they take measurements
at different points in the lake at
different times of the year sorry in
different
years and at any point uh in the lake at
a given time they measure different
features of the water how much nitrogen
is in the water how much phosphorus is
in the water at that time what's the
temperature of the water how easy is it
to look through the water how
transparent is the water uh how much
rainfall has there been uh in the last
day and so on these are all our
independent variables X1 X2 X3 X4 X5
and we want to see whether we can find a
relationship that or an equation built
from all of these parts that predict t
the actual amount of toxic algae found
in the water at that time so what you're
looking at here is just a single x value
and a single y value here we've got one
2 3 4 five X's so we have X1 X2 X3 X4
and X5 I can't draw that we would have
five quote unquote horizontal dimensions
and then the sixth vertical
Dimension uh the sixth vertical
Dimension is the
eror sorry the sixth vertical direct the
sixth vertical Dimension is T toxic Al
Al Alo blooms yeah okay so what is this
equation nobody knows
um but some researchers here at UVM have
actually applied genetic programming to
try and find out here we go as I
mentioned uh in genetic programming that
are that's trying to solve symbolic
regression genomes here's one genotypes
here's gen genotype one genotype 2 or
parent one and parent two they are not
encoded as vectors of numbers they're
encoded as in a tree data structure some
of you taking this course have not taken
a data structures course so this may be
a little
confusing what I'll invite you to do is
notice that this tree is made up of
mathematical operators like over here
multiplication plus and each uh Leaf in
the tree all of these nodes that do not
have any nodes below them are made up of
uh state of State variables like X or
floating Point numbers 0.8 1.4 so as
always when we're starting an
evolutionary algorithm we usually create
a population of random candidate
Solutions so how did we create P1 and
how did we create P2 let's start with P1
we start by uh we want to create this
genotype at random so we make a bag and
in that bag we throw in all the possible
uh mathematical operations that we think
might be a part of this equation and we
also throw into this bag all of the uh
variables so this just says X and Y but
if we're doing this problem we throw in
n p WB and R and T we throw them in here
and we throw in some constants as well
we'll see why in a moment we shake up
the bag so we got a whole bunch of
operators and operand we reach into that
bag we pull something out of that bag at
random and in this case we M we pulled
out the multiplication operator that
becomes the root of our
tree the multiplication operator
requires two arguments so we create two
outgoing edges from this tree we need to
multiply two things together we don't
know what those things are yet so let's
go to the first branch of the tree put
the multiplication operator back in the
bag shake the bag up again reach into
the bag and this T time we pull out plus
plus also
requires plus also requires two
operators throw plus back in the bag
Shake It Up reach in to the bag again in
this case we pull out Point uh
808 does not require any arguments so
we've created a leaf to the tree we go
back up to the plus we need two
arguments we've already created one we
need a second argument so we shake up
the bag we reach in again in this case
we pulled out at random X and we've
completed this part of the tree we have
to go back up to the root of the tree
multiplication we filled in this leftand
Branch we still need to fill in we need
still need to randomly set the second
argument for this multiplication so we
shake up our full bag again reach in and
pull out at this case a random value
which is 1.4 and we have now created an
equation we have now created an equation
at random and we have our first genotype
I will invite you to while this is fresh
in your mind and this lecture is about
to end do this uh go through this
operation with this bag to create P2
reach into the bag pull out Division and
see if you can con conru this we will
finish this lecture uh on Tuesday when
I'm pretty sure I'll be back to see you
all in person uh just as a reminder you
have a quiz due tonight undergraduates
you're working on quiz number three uh
you're working on assignment number
three graduate students you're working
on assignments five and six have a good
rest of your week and I'll see you all
on Tuesday thank you byebye